Write an initial Foreword (#1)
divnix/nix-book: src/ch01-00-foreword.md

# Foreword

In recent years, it has become an industry standard to deploy software using
some form of containerization; and while this trend has helped to reduce the
complexity of our deployments by offering process and file isolation at
runtime, it has done virtually nothing to reduce the complexity of building
and maintaining software.

> Nix tries to bridge this gap using the same isolation primitizes used by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nix bridges this gap using the same isolation primitives used by
```

Author: whoops, good catch

Author: also, I used "tries to" here to anticipate the nay sayers who will inevitably crop up and point out that nix does not ensure reproducible binaries in absolutely every case atm. While this isn't exactly Nix's fault, is usually related to the code or compiler exhibiting not deterministic behavior, we know that people don't always lean toward absolute reason either :smiley:

Reviewer: As a statement of confidence, I'd try to avoid 'hedging' claims too much too early in the foreword. Valid objections on detail seem like a layer violation of the attentive reader himself, here.

Author: You're right. And this isn't the way I would have wrote it if I wasn't overthinking it to begin with :smile:

container technologies to ensure environmental conditions are precisely

> mirrored _at build time_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
met _at build time_.
```

Author: does "met" clarify that this is a reproducible attribute though?

Reviewer: yep, I'd say so. I sense 'mirrored' might try convey a special thought that is not immediately inferrable by the reader...

Author: less syllables :+1:

Thanks to it's powerful expression language, Nix's ability to compose packages
is versatile enough even to provide elegant solutions for generating these same

> OCI compliant containers in a totally duplicable fashion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCI compliant containers in a totally DRY fashion.
```

Author: not sure if the requested change actually has the intended meaning. If we build a container from a dockerfile several times, we are not really repeating ourselves(not modifying the file), but we are also not guaranteed to get the same container every run either.

Reviewer: when I look back to when I started refactoring dockerfiles into nix, it was because I could derive several images with ease from a single shared config state.

That was real nice, since it made it a lot easier to keep two images that are part of a micro-service architecture in sync. (the cost associated with this might be why folks sometimes never progress to make truly 'micro'-containers and just go with a mono-image or otherwise it requires quite some dockerfile templating and code generation. But once we are with templating, then nix offers better primitives to that problem.)

I also was intrigued by the relatively lean images. Although with careless nixpkgs pinning came a doubled closure at that time... :smiley:

Reviewer: I mean people had invented ksonnet for some of those composability reasons... https://github.com/ksonnet/ksonnet/tree/master/lib

Author: Yes well, I have personally never been a fan of docker, despite having to uses under certain conditions, so if you'd like to improve this section, then please do so, because I feel my lack of experience coming off :sweat_smile:

In fact, a Nix build-recipe, termed a _derivation_, is

> nothing more than the input to a function whose output is the artifact it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nothing more than the input to a function whose output is the file system artifact it
```

builds. Same inputs? Same output; regardless of the environment Nix is invoked
in.

These outputs can be anything:
* A traditional software package
* A simple script with pinned dependencies built in
* A shell environment containing the development dependencies of a software project
* An entire operating system — NixOS

The final product is always an immutable and unique hash, which can
be used to compute whether a package even needs building or already exists;

> either on the local system, or in a remote cache.

Reviewer: Maybe just leap-frog to announce CA here? (At least) container folks should have a decent understanding of what it means.

Author: I was considering whether CA should be mentioned so early here, or if we should leave that for a later discussion :thinking:

Author: @jonringer, any input here?

Reviewer 2: not much of an opinion, but I would probably try to avoid trying to introduce any technical concepts as part of the foreward. Leave that to the content. More why, less what

At a high level, Nix allows for decomposing the complexity of software,
configurations, services, and the ecosystems they make up, into small

> composable units which may then be reproduced, distributed, ran, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composable functions which may then be reproduced, distributed, ran, or
```

Author: I like functions, but I don't want to scare people. Then again, I dunno if there is any way to introduce Nix without being at least a little scary, but that is what we are trying to accomplish here :smile:

Reviewer: which leads me to another aspect I remember from mgt class: _a shared glossary_.
Maybe, between Foreword and Introduction, there is room to prepare conceptual mental headway for what is to come.

I often miss the big picture cast in words of 'gravitas' (not only in nix docs)...

Author: perhaps the list in this foreword should link to those sections later in the book as a start

# Foreward

Nix is far more than just another package manager. Based on a rigorous set of

> principles, it empowers the user to make changes without fearing a hopelessly

Reviewer 2: "Based on a rigorous set of principles" 

is kind of vague, I think something like " With strong guarentees of reproducibility, ..."

broken system as a result.

> Consider a standard Linux workflow. You run your servers on the latest LTS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider a standard Linux workflow. One can run servers on the latest LTS
```

Should avoid 2nd-person in documentation

> release of Ubuntu. You run the same versions of the same software for months at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
release of your favorite linux distro. You run the same versions of the same software for months at
```

a time, fearing what might happen if you were to do a full system upgrade.

> Eventually, an import CVE notice comes up and you're forced to upgrade. You

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually, an import CVE notice comes up, or a requirement to use a newer version of a package and you're forced to upgrade. You
```

> issue the corresponding `apt` commands, and sure enough, some obscure linked

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
issue the corresponding `apt`, `dnf`, `yum`, or other commands, and sure enough, some obscure linked
```

library issue arises, causing a service startup failure. Due to the imperative

> nature of a traditional package manager, the previously working state of your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
library issue arises, causing a service startup failure. Due to the global
mutable state of a traditional package managers, the previously working state of your
```

machine is lost, and the only choice is to hunt down the root cause of the

> issue and debug until it's resolved. If your lucky, this will only take a few

Reviewer 2: snapshotting has become more popular. May want to mention that separating configuration and data is also useful.

hours.

> Some might point to container managers like Docker as a potential solution to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some might point to containerization technologies like Docker as a potential solution to
```

this problem, and they can certainly help. But since containers use the same
imperative packaging tools to build images, you've simply pushed the problem
one level deeper. Now you have to worry about what happens when it's time to
upgrade your container, instead of the underlying OS. Not to mention the
overhead of bundling an entire operating system just to run a single

> application process.

Reviewer 2: this could probably be condensed.

"Containers are also hindered by the fact the common ways
of generating a container aren't reproducible. Re-building
a container image at a later date may produce a significantly
different image."

Reviewer 2: This also feels a bit repeated since we touched upon containers above

What if you're application could simply _declare_ all of it's dependencies up
front, and bundle them in an isolated package completely free of interference
from the OS, so that if it runs on your machine, it will run on _any_ machine?
What if this artifact could be uniquely and reliably identified with a simple
hash? Further, what if you could iterate on this package without fear of losing

> previously working versions?

Reviewer 2: Should highlight value, not implementation
```suggestion
What if you're application could simply _declare_ all of it's dependencies up
front, and bundle them in an isolated package completely free of interference
from the OS, so that if it runs on your machine, it will run on _any_ machine?
Further, what if you could iterate on this package without fear of losing
previously working versions?
```

> Enter Nix. Now you can solve the above scenario in any way that suites your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enter Nix. Now you can solve the above scenario in any way that suits your
```

`nix-shell` to ensure your developers always have the tools they need to be
effective.

Need even more control? Use NixOS and manage your entire operating system
leveraging all the aforementioned benefits of Nix, because after all, it's just
another software package. Perform an upgrade of the system and now it won't
boot? No problem. The previous working state of your machine is a simple boot
entry away.

Need to share software artifacts across a large team? Simply wire up a Nix
cache, and rest easy knowing that if your package passes CI, then it's going to
work for everyone who needs access to it, regardless of OS or archtitecture.

Need to declaratively manage your services and containers? Build truly
reproducible Docker or OCI compliant containers using Nix's powerful
integration.

We've tried managing software dependencies in a shared, stateful environment
for generations. We know the pain this causes. We can keep building better
band-aids, or we can use a system that attempts to solve these problems at
their root, and in this author's humble opinion, wildly suceeds. Get ready
to change the way you think about software distribution and welcome to the

> Nix community!

Reviewer 2: This sounds like a call-to-arms ;)

Author: is that good or bad :sweat_smile:
